# Thoughts on Programming Languages (Part 3 — Lambdas)

## Lambda Expressions and Closures

If I were to pick one language feature which the 21st-century software industry
has agreed upon, I would say lambda expressions.
Functional languages have had them since decades ago.
Mixed-paradigm languages like JavaScript and Rust had them built-in.
They also started invading the OOP clique.
C# adopted them (as always, thank you C# team!).
C++11 got lambdas.
Heck, even Java now has lambdas with the newest Java 8.
That was surprising.

I would argue, lambda expressions have won.

-------

For those new to the concept, I’d like to provide a threefold observation of
what lambda expressions and closures are.

## Part 1: Functions Can Be Passed Around

I remember — back in high school, I was told in my Java class that objects and
properties are analogous to physical things in the real world, and methods and
functions define behaviors/actions involving those "things."
Even to this day, I think that's a reasonable phrasing to start with for a
beginner.

A few months later, I started picking up some GUI in Java, and I noticed
something felt very unnatural.
Things like buttons, check boxes, could count as "physical" things and wrapping
them in classes made sense.
But I was also having to wrap behaviors/actions into classes.
Let's take `ActionListener`s for example (code borrowed from
[here](http://stackoverflow.com/questions/891380/java-anonymous-class-that-implements-actionlistener)).

```Java
JPanel panel = new JPanel();
panel.add(new JButton(new AbstractAction("name of button") {
  public void actionPerformed(ActionEvent e) {
    //do stuff here
  }
}));
```

I find it unnatural that, when I have already established the notion of
functions/methods to represent actions, in this piece of code, I still have to
wrap a method inside an anonymous class whose sole purpose is to contain that
method.

This unnaturalness originates from the Java rule that
functions/behaviors/actions cannot be passed around as sovereign entities.
They are not considered as "things," whatever that means.

Let's take a look at a JavaScript equivalent of that code.
JavaScript is a language that cannot live without lambdas.

```JS
let panel = document.createElement('div');
let button = document.createElement('button');
button.addEventListener('click', function actionPerformed(e) {
  // do stuff here
});
panel.appendChild(button);
```

Well sure, the two pieces of code have the same number of lines in terms of code
length.
But in JS's defense, this is because of the way the DOM API is written.
What is to be noticed is that in the JS code, we were able to get around the
awkwardness of having to wrap a function inside an object just because in Java,
functions are not as first-class-citizen as objects.

Even in everyday lingo, I intuitively conceptualize actions/behaviors as sole
entities.
Consider this sentence: "In this list of names, leave only the ones that have
the letter A."
In this instruction, "having the letter A" is a behavior/qualification.
Now let's rewrite this sentence into JS.

```JS
function filterNamesWithA(names) { // names is an array
  return names.filter(function (name) { return name.indexOf('A') !== -1; });
}
```

That was very trivial because the `.filter()` method **takes in a behavior i.e.
a function as its argument** and uses it to decide which names are going to be
allowed out.

Functions shall be passed around, because that's how I like to conceptualize.

## Part 2: Functions Can Be Anonymous

Let's take another look at the code snippet above.
Notice that the function passed into the `.filter()` method did not have any
name.
It was an anonymous function.
Do I really need a name for a function whose intent is so trivially obvious?
This observation alone is enough to support my argument that some functions can
stay anonymous.
In fact, anonymous functions are so popular in JS that the newest ES6 added a
syntactic sugar called **arrow functions**.

```JS
names.filter(name => name.indexOf('A') !== -1 )
```

Arrow functions are great for enhanced readability.

Now I'm aware there are people in the JS community who claim no function shall
be anonymous.
Their primary justification is that stack traces look ugly.
Well, here's a stack trace from one of my production errors last month.

```Text
.....
at Object.<anonymous> (/mnt/data/1/node_modules/bluebird/js/main/generators.js:133:15)
From previous event:
From previous event:
at new PromiseSpawn (/mnt/data/1/node_modules/bluebird/js/main/generators.js:52:13)
at Object.<anonymous> (/mnt/data/1/node_modules/bluebird/js/main/generators.js:131:21)
.....
```

I mean, sure, `<anonymous>` isn’t the prettiest name, but the V8 engine is kind
enough to tell us the exact line where things went wrong.
With the right runtime support, I never had a problem tracing down errors
through anonymous functions.

I do understand there are other arguments toward using named functions.
Please do name your functions when really necessary.
But I cannot agree with the claim that no function should ever be anonymous.
Anonymous functions contribute to readability in short contexts and are often
concise enough to not have a name.

So I'd like to include anonymity in my threefold definition of lambdas.
After all, JavaScript, Java, C++ and C# all support anonymous lambdas.

## Part 3: Functions Can Capture Their Environment

Let's make our `names.filter` example a tad bit more complicated.

```JS
function filterNamesContaining(someStr, names) {
  // filter out names that contain `someStr` as a substring
  return names.filter(name => name.indexOf(someStr) !== -1);
}
```

This function feels a little more evolved because I can choose what the
substring requirement is.

Now notice that my anonymous arrow function is accessing `someStr`, which is not
an identifier created within its own scope.
It is a variable created in the parent function scope, and is being *accessed*
by the arrow function.

How is this implemented?
Put simply, the arrow function is not only a function but also a congregation of
accesses to the variables defined in the parent lexical scope.
It is both.
In JavaScript, whenever a lambda expression is in place, accesses to the
surrounding environment automatically get passed into the lambda.

Such lambda expressions which capture the parent lexical scope are called
**closures**.
In JavaScript, every lambda is a closure.

Why are closures a good thing?
It helps with expressiveness and aligns with my intuitive description of
behaviors/qualifications.
Assume I were to write the last example without using closures.

```JS
function filterNamesContaining(someStr, names) {
  let rtn = [];
  for (let name of names) {
    if (name.indexOf(someStr) !== -1) { rtn.push(name); }
  }
  return rtn;
}
```

The classic for-loop-and-collect pattern is inevitable.
Lambdas without closures, in such cases, are useless, because the behaviors they
describe require context.
By allowing closures, lambdas are given a chance to describe something *in
context* and become more expressive.

Thanks to closures, `filterNamesContaining()` could be written in one line
instead of 3–5 lines, with a more declarative look and feel (whatever that
means).
I'm a big fan of closures and I'd favor languages with closure support over
those without.

-------

Next, I further develop the concept of closures in the sense of information
containment.
I'd like to begin with an inspiring concept from C++: functors.

## Functors

C++ 11 got lambdas, but old C++ hadn’t.
Yet, C++ has for a long time had operator overloading, and one of the
overloadable operators is `operator()`, as in a function call.
A class that overloads `operator()` is often called a **functor**.
Here’s an example taken from
[StackOverflow](http://stackoverflow.com/questions/356950/c-functors-and-their-uses).

```C++
// this is a functor
struct add_x {
  add_x(int x) : x(x) {}
  int operator()(int y) { return x + y; }

private:
  int x;
};

// Now you can use it like this:
add_x add42(42); // create an instance of the functor class
int i = add42(8); // and "call" it
assert(i == 50); // and it added 42 to its argument

std::vector<int> in; // assume this contains a bunch of values)
std::vector<int> out;
// Pass a functor to std::transform, which calls the functor on every element 
// in the input sequence, and stores the result to the output sequence
std::transform(in.begin(), in.end(), out.begin(), add_x(1)); 
assert(out[i] == in[i] + 1); // for all i
```

So a functor creates an object that is also a function in the sense that it is
callable.
The class `add_x` generates functions such as `add42`.
From then on, `add42()` can be called just like a function.

But how is a function object like `add42()` different from a plain old function
pointer?
My observation is that function objects can contain states.
In the example, the constructor of `add_x`receives and keeps a state, called
`x`, and utilizes that state every time `operator()` is called.
This pattern makes possible a separation of what to show and what to hide.
In the example, `x` is something to be hidden and `y` is something to be made
explicit.
Information hiding is a very important pattern in OOP, and I'd say all the good
arguments in favor of the notion of information hiding apply to functors (*and
all the arguments against apply to the hardcore FP/immutability advocates*).

## Information Containment Using Closures

So a functor is a stateful function generator.
Doesn't that sound a bit like closures?
A closure is a function that contain references to states in the parent lexical
scope.
So if I can write a function that defines variables and return a closure with
access to those variables, I am essentially generating functions while
internally keeping a state!
I am thereby doing the same thing as C++ functors.
Let's achieve this in JavaScript, which has no support for operator overloading.

```JS
function addX(x) {
  return y => x + y;
}

let add42 = addX(42);
let i = add42(8);
assert(i === 50);
```

I successfully achieved a functor pattern in JavaScript.
We didn't need any operator overloading, thanks to closures!
Now we can achieve information modularity/containment in JS with closures.
People like [Douglas Crockford](http://javascript.crockford.com/private.html),
back in the day, further exploited this idea of information containment through
closures in order to create a whole system of OOP and private members in JS.
Assume I'm writing a JS SDK against a big REST API.
The REST server has a fixed domain called `http://foo.com/`, and every function
in my SDK should wrap a HTTP call to a path in the domain, such as
`http://foo.com/user/1`.
So I decide to reveal a function `getUser(id)` to the SDK user, and there is no
reason to reveal the `http://foo.com/` part of the work.

```JS
import makeHttpRequest from 'http-util';

const baseUrl = 'http://foo.com';

export function getUser(id) {
  const response_body = makeHttpRequest(`${baseUrl}/user/${id}`);
  // blah...
}
```

Since every function in JS is automatically a closure, my public function
`getUser(id)` has access to `baseUrl`, but does not reveal it to the public.
I've accomplished information hiding, and an entire methodology of OOP could
ensue.
I use this pattern daily in my production code, and I'd argue that the entire
npm ecosystem cannot exist without this pattern.

JS is a language that has no public/private/protected/etc. specifiers.
When I wish to achieve information containment/hiding in JS, I turn to closures.
In my opinion, its closures are the language's most important feature that makes
it such an interesting mixture of OOP and FP.
Its closures let us achieve OOP-style information containment, while also
helping us compose functions to express our intents.

-------

Although I’m not yet done with the topic of closures, I’d like to stop here and
split a topic into multiple episodes.
Following episodes will cover capture clauses and closure memory leaks, before
moving onto a different topic.

## Conclusion

-   Declaring an anonymous function in-line is great for concisely expressing a
behavior/qualification.

-   A closure is a lambda that can capture its lexical environment.

-   Closures can be used to accomplish information
containment/hiding/modularity, thanks to lexical scopes that become inaccessible
at the language level but still live on the memory... ***Spoiler:*** ...which
could lead to memory leaks.
