# "I don't know" - Why is that so hard to say?

In the summer of 2015, I maintained a Wordpress blog titled "The IT Crowd" as
part of a college writing course.
This was the mission statement of my blog:

> Over the summer I will be sharing some stories from my internship at Duke
University's biology department.
You're probably thinking my job involves some sort of biology, but in fact I
know nothing about biology.
Try to guess why I'm there based on what I do: I answer a lot of emails, and
about half of them involve asking to turn the computer off and on.
That's right, I work for the department's IT support team.
We're a small team of 6 people overseeing hundreds of department members and the
computers they use, so sometimes the day could be quite busy.
While asking to reboot over and over again might sound quite boring, in fact the
job is a lot more than that.
Having specialized knowledge across a multitude of topics is one thing, but
explaining it to non-technical folks is another.
The most exciting part about tech support is that, despite the obviously
technical nature, there is always that one human factor by the end of any
support session.
On my blog, I want to explore these psychological intricacies behind customer
support: what makes our customers satisfied, and how we train ourselves to meet
such expectations.

The following was Post #3.

--------

I've been using Gmail exclusively for almost 10 years now.
As such, when I have a customer walk in asking why Apple Mail wouldn't
autocomplete her recipient addresses, there's only one phrase that comes to my
mind: "I don't know."

In not only IT but just about any field, saying "I don't know" is often
considered impolite and demonstrating a lack of effort.
So people often at least give things a try just to deserve to say that phrase at
the end.
But in tech support, I feel things are a bit different: we give things a try
because they really seem doable in the beginning.
Let me continue with the story to explain how so.

She just yesterday upgraded to a newer operating system, and since then Apple
Mail hasn't been autocompleting email addresses when she composes an email.
OK, I have no idea why.
So I turn to the first reason that makes saying "I don't know" so difficult -
Google.
The almighty search engine tells me to go to some location deep inside the
customer's backup and copy a weirdly named file into the new operating system.
I did that, but still there was no autocomplete.
"Why didn't that work?"
she asks.
I don't know - I want to say.

But my geek motor has already started running, so I dig deeper.
I open up the file on a text editor, only to find out it's not a text-based
file.
The mysterious file turns out to be a database of all her previous recipient
emails!
Great, Apple Mail must be reading in from this file to get autocomplete running.
Then, why isn't autocomplete working, now that I've copied the file over?
I, of course, don't know - I want to say.

At this point she tells me she can live without autocomplete.
But I really want to make this work.
It's not even my own inconvenience, but it excites me and I feel like I have to
give it at least another 15 minutes of try.
I don't know why - my heart just says so.

Here we go, Google.
Apparently, when the new operating system came out, the Mail app had decided to
change its internal structure and use another database file with a longer,
stranger name.
I notice that even the structure of the database has completely changed, meaning
that just renaming the old file won't work.
For example, if the older file stored John and Doe separately, the new file
stores the full name John Doe.

This leads my attention to my shabby Excel skills.
I export the database file to Excel, and start merging the first names and the
last names into full names.
Then I import the new Excel file into the new database Apple Mail apparently
uses now.
If I open Mail now, autocomplete should work.
Roll the drums!
Nah - no luck there.
The customer briefly leaves and comes back to the room with a cup of tea.
"Still not working?"
No.
And I don't know why - I want to say.

Time has gone well past another 15 minutes of try, and I'm still sitting here
with a flavorful tea and a distasteful technical issue.
Ugh.
But I decide to give another 15 minutes.
I start testing the Mail app's behavior one by one.
I send an email from it, receive an email to it, refresh the database file from
time to time, etc.
After 30 minutes, I discover that Mail writes to the database, but doesn't read
from it.
"My gosh - why does this program need to act this way!"
I don't know - I answer myself.

I decide to stop investigating.
It has already been an hour.
I wrap up by showing her the list of previous email addresses I managed to dig
up earlier and by advising her to refer to this file if she needs to recall an
email address.
So why was it so hard to say "I don't know" all along?
She did suggest I stop in the middle, and after all, I didn't reach the ideal
resolution anyway.

Sure, I may seem like having wasted some extra time.
But at that cost, I feel I have earned one thing: the customer's trust.
I went well beyond her expectations and demonstrated a motivation to help to the
best of my abilities.
I even ended up with a reasonable alternative to the ideal scenario.
So the next time she comes and looks for me, she knows I'm not going to bail
out.
I'm going to jump straight into the problem, despite the fears of not being able
to figure everything out.
This way I benefit not just my own skills but the reputation of the entire team.

There's nothing more important in customer support than trust.
That, I do know.
