# Thoughts on Programming Languages (Part 4.1 — JS Callbacks in Loops)

This piece is a supplement to the first section of [Part 4](20150124.md).
Please check out Part 4 first for sufficient context.

## A Classic JS Interview Question

How can I fix the problem with the first JS code snippet in Part 4?

```JS
// domElems is an array of DOM elements of length 5
for (var i = 0; i < domElems.length; ++i) {
  domElems[i].addEventListener('click', () => {
    console.log(i);
  });
}
```

Let's go back to the key observation as to why it isn't working as intended: all
five closures are referencing the same integer.
So any solution to this problem must include the notion that every closure must
be somehow passed a unique number into it.

Let's build further upon this logic.
As long as the five closures live in the same lexical scope, using a same
identifier to indicate what number should be passed into each closure just
cannot work.
A same identifier in the same lexical scope repeats the compiler musings
explained in Part 4 all over again!

In order to resolve this issue while preserving a consistent variable name, I
must give each closure a separate lexical scope and create a new integer within
each scope that the corresponding closure can refer to.
I have three suggestions as to how to accomplish this.

### Solution 1

```JS
// domElems is an array of DOM elements of length 5
for (var i = 0; i < domElems.length; ++i) {
  ((j) => {
    domElems[j].addEventListener('click', () => {
      console.log(j);
    });
  })(i);
}
```

In this somewhat ugly for-loop, a new lexical scope is introduced for each
iteration because, in JS, a new function means a new scope.
Let me break it down step by step:

1.  Line 3: A new anonymous function is created, thereby starting a new lexical
scope.

2.  Lines 3 and 8: The current value of `i` gets copied into `j`.
Primitive values get copied, right?

3.  Line 4: A new event listener is created, and it contains a reference to the
`j` of the outside anonymous function which has been created specifically for
this event listener.

### Solution 2

```JS
domElems.forEach((elem, i) => {
  elem.addEventListener('click', () = {
    console.log(i);
  });
});
```

My favorite solution.
This solution is much prettier and benefits from how `.forEach()` provides a new
`i` for each new lexical scope, but the gist is the same: ***for a new event
listener, I need a new lexical scope***.

### Solution 3 (An ES6 Solution)

```JS
for (let i = 0; i < domElems.length; ++i) {
  domElems[i].addEventListener('click', () => {
    console.log(i);
  });
}
```

If you're confused how this code is different from the original problematic
code, the `var` keyword changed to `let`.
ES6 introduced a new, special kind of looping called the for-let-loop.
It is similar to the classic for-loop, but each iteration becomes a new lexical
scope, and **there's an implicit `let i = 0` (or `let i = 1` and so on) at the
beginning of each iteration**.
This last bit is important, because without it, the problem wouldn't be solved.
A new lexical scope isn't enough — a new block-scoped variable within it is
necessary so that every closure refers to different identifiers (recall that
ES6's `let` block-scopes variables).
