# Thoughts on Programming Languages (Part 4 — Captures)

In Part 3, I analyzed the semantic and information-containment benefits that
closures bring to the table.
This time, I'd like to dig deeper into how closures capture their lexical
environments.
In particular, I have classified capture behaviors into 3 categories.
There may be more categories, but these are the 3 I’ll cover.

-------

## Capture by Reference

If I were to apply for a job requiring JS coding, I would definitely make sure I
understood the problem with the following code.

```JS
// domElems is an array of DOM elements of length 5
for (var i = 0; i < domElems.length; ++i) {
  domElems[i].addEventListener('click', () => {
    console.log(i);
  });
}
```

Those new to the language may expect the third element in the array to write 2
to the console — I mean, that is probably the intent of any code like that!

However, in fact, any of the five elements outputs 5 to the console.
This is because closures in JS capture their lexical environments by reference.
When the JIT compiler — let's take V8 for example — goes through that lexical
scope, it realizes that a closure in the scope requires reference to `i`.
Thus V8 creates a [C++ `Context`
instance](http://mrale.ph/blog/2012/09/23/grokking-v8-closures-for-fun.html)
which basically resembles the JS object `{i: 0}`.

Now the for-loop starts executing.
The first element in the array is being given an event listener; V8 creates a
closure and attaches that `Context` to it.
`i` is icremented to 1.
Then the second element is given a closure, and V8 attaches the same `Context`.
Third, fourth, fifth, and so on.
V8 keeps attaching the same `Context` to all five closures.
So they each keep a reference to the *same* `i`, which has been incremented to 5
by the end of the loop.

In short, all these inner compiler workings come down to this: closures in JS
capture their lexical environments ***by reference***.
I find this particularly interesting because that is the only case I know of in
JS where primitive values are accessed by reference (there might be others).
Remember how in C++ we can make `&int` references against primitive integers?
In JS, primitive types like integers can only be copied, and can't be referenced
— except in case of closures AFAIK.
This is interesting only in theory, though — in practical C++, passing primitive
values by references seems like an unpopular choice anyway.

I have prepared a [separate write-up](20150125.md) that covers solutions to the
problem mentioned so far.
Since that piece gets too JS-specific, I've kept it off of this article.

So that was JavaScript's closures.
To sum up, they only capture by reference.
What about C#?
It's the same thing, closures in C# can only capture by reference, too.
So if I were to write a C# equivalent of the above JS code, I would run into the
same kind of errors.
But a major difference between C# and JS is that variables in C# are
block-scoped, unlike those in pre-ES6 JS which are function-scoped.
This disparity would bring forth a new kind of solutions to the event handler
problem.
Example borrowed from
[here](http://csharpindepth.com/articles/chapter5/closures.aspx):

```C#
List<Action> actions = new List<Action>();
for (int counter = 0; counter < 10; counter++)
{
  int copy = counter; // block-scoping in action!!
  actions.Add(() => Console.WriteLine(copy));
}
```

Notice how Line 4 fixes the error thanks to block-scoping.
In pre-ES6 JavaScript such a solution would be impossible — `copy` would belong
in the same lexical scope for all closures, because of function-scoping.
This disparity is a major source of confusion for those transitioning to JS from
C# or a block-scoped language.

## Capture by Immutability?

If I were to write a Java equivalent of the above C# code, I would run into a
compiler error complaining that `copy` is not final.
So a correct version would look like:

```Java
List<Runnable> actions = new ArrayList<Runnable>();        
for (int counter = 0; counter < 10; counter++)
{
  final int copy = counter; // notice the `final` keyword!
  actions.add(() -> { System.out.println(copy); });
}
```

So closures in Java won't capture anything mutable!
That's definitely one fine way of handling the situation.
It places a stricter constraint, but immutability does solve a lot of problems
at once.

It is interesting to note that this convention has pre-Java8 roots.
I recall that, even before Java 8 came around, anonymous inner classes could
capture final variables.
For example, a pre-Java8 equivalent of the above code would look like:

```Java
List<Runnable> actions = new ArrayList<Runnable>();        
for (int counter = 0; counter < 10; counter++) {
  final int copy = counter; // notice the `final` keyword!
  actions.add(new Runnable() {
    public void run() { System.out.println(copy); }
  });
}
```

So I'm noticing a similarity here.
And indeed, it turns out there's a reason for this similarity.
In Java 8, lambdas are merely syntactic sugars for creating an instance of "an
interface with a single abstract method."
Let me quote a piece on Dr. Dobbs':

> You can supply a lambda expression whenever an object of an interface with a
> single abstract method is expected.
> Such an interface is called a functional interface.
> 
> (...)
> 
> In fact, conversion to a functional interface is the only thing that you can
> do with a lambda expression in Java.
> In other programming languages that support function literals, you can declare
> function types such as (String, String) -> int, declare variables of those
> types, and use the variables to save function expressions.
> In Java, you can't even assign a lambda expression to a variable of type
> Object because Object is not a functional interface.
> The Java designers decided to stick strictly with the familiar concept of
> interfaces instead of adding function types to the language.

Therefore, I would argue that Java's lambdas are not as first-class-citizen as,
say, C#'s or JavaScript's lambdas.

I was doing further research on this "final capture" behavior, and came across
the following explanation on
[Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Final_%28Java%29#Final_and_inner_classes).

> This allows the Java compiler to "capture" the value of the variable at
> run-time and store a copy as a field in the inner class.
> Once the outer method has terminated and its stack frame has been removed, the
> original variable is gone but the inner class's private copy persists in the
> class's own memory.

This bit got me thinking.
I was going to label this section as "Capture by Immutability" with firm
assurance.
But after reading that Wikipedia piece, I started thinking — so after all,
Java's lambdas essentially capture by copying!
That's why I ended up leaving a question mark at the end of the section title.
So far, my understanding of Java's capture behaviors is that they are basically
captures by copy — with the added constraint that the captured variables must be
final, in order to prevent errors and race conditions.

## Capture by Copy

So let's talk about copy-based capture behaviors a little more.
What other language has captures by copy?
C++ 11!

C++ 11 brought about lambdas to the language, and they introduced the
interesting idea that the programmer gets to explicitly declare which values
will be captured and how they will be captured: by reference or by copy.
Let’s look at an example, along with a quote from
[cprogramming.com](http://www.cprogramming.com/c++11/c++11-lambda-closures.html).

```C++
#include <iostream>
#include <thread>
#include <vector>

using namespace std;

int main()
{
  vector<thread> workers;
  for (int i = 0; i < 5; ++i)
  {
    // notice the [=], which means capture by copy
    workers.push_back(thread([=] { cout << i; }));
  }
  for (thread& t: workers) t.join();
  return 0;
}
```

```Text
[] Capture nothing

[&] Capture any referenced variable by reference

[=] Capture any referenced variable by making a copy

[=, &foo] Capture any referenced variable by making a copy, but capture
variable foo by reference

[bar] Capture bar by making a copy; don’t copy anything else

[this] Capture the this pointer of the enclosing class
```

The above example would print out some combination of 0, 1, 2, 3, 4 in an
undefined order (because of threading behavior).
If I change the `[=]` to `[&]`, then I get `55555` printed out instead.
That's just as if in C# or JavaScript — capture by reference!

One scenario where capture by copy would be dangerous is during multithreading.

```C++
#include <chrono>
#include <iostream>
#include <thread>
#include <vector>

using namespace std;

int main() {
  vector<thread> workers;
  
  bool isComplete = false;
  
  thread t = thread([=] { 
    int i = 0;
    while (!isComplete) i += 0;
  });
  
  this_thread::sleep_for(chrono::milliseconds(500));
  isComplete = true;
  t.join();
  cout << "complete!" << endl;
  
  return 0;
}
```

The above code will result in a deadlock because two separate copies of
`isComplete` are being kept, unlike what was probably intended.
Changing that `[=]` to `[&]` would solve the problem.

I think that throughout the article, I have given examples of when capture by
copy would be good and when capture by reference would be good.
So it’s interesting to see that C++ ended up with both types of capture
behaviors.
Perhaps there are some low-level optimization implications behind C++’s closures
as well.

## Conclusion

-   Sometimes I wish I had capture by copy

-   Sometimes I wish I had capture by reference

-   Oh, C++ has both!

-   But mixing both could be risky sometimes, e.g. out of confusion

-   There are ways in either approach to get around the problem of not having
the other approach, so sticking with one approach might not be a bad idea.
For example, JavaScript chose the path of capture by reference.
