# Speech to high school students

## Why you should consider computer science as a major

I wrote the following piece for a writing course in school.
This was the prompt:

> You are to speak to a group of high school seniors about careers in computer
> engineering.
> You assume they know nothing about the complexities of coding or anything
> realistic about the potential of a career in the field.
> Provide your best basic information with relevant anecdotes and make the
> material as accessible as you can.

------------

Good morning all, it is a pleasure to speak to you about careers in computer
engineering.

Let us quickly try to define computer engineering.
I know you all spend a lot of time on Facebook or Snapchat.
These products are so nice to use because they offer really fast response
speeds.
You send a Snap to a friend, and in less than a minute you receive a Snap back!
OK, cool, but you might ask: “Isn’t that how it should be, because computers are
really fast?”
And you’re right – if I were to pick a computer-savvy group from you and taught
how to make mobile apps, I could get you to make a Snapchat mockup in a matter
of weeks or even days.
So it’s not that amazing, right?

Well, if you think like that, here’s a fact you need to reconsider: Facebook or
Snapchat runs at such a blazing speed while millions of people are accessing the
service at the same time.
That is, the system is engineered to handle a massive amount of traffic.
On the other hand, whatever you end up making will be as fast only across, what,
the 20 of you.
That’s the amazing part about what Facebook and Snapchat have achieved.
Their engineers have spent countless days and nights to keep things fast across
the entire Planet Earth.

So how do engineers make that happen?
I won’t go into the immense technical world behind it – instead, I’d like to
offer an analogy.
Let’s go back a few years and imagine you’re playing with Lego blocks in
kindergarten.
Oh, you just finished that pretty little building – nice!
It probably wasn’t that difficult for you.
You most likely didn’t even have an architectural plan, only a vague vision of
what you had wanted.
And building it must have been fairly straightforward too, as it is only a tiny
building and you didn’t need to reuse any parts.

Now imagine your dad sees your work and happily asks you to create a castle that
can hold thousands of people, instead of 5 people.
This time, you can’t just quickly add the blocks up and call it a day, because
the risk of improvising like that is too high.
What if Dad isn’t happy with what you end up with?
What if you realize half-way through that a part of your castle doesn’t fit in
with the rest of the structure and you have to start all over again?
Because you’re building a system of a larger scale, you now need a good
blueprint to start with, and you need to break down your big picture into
reusable parts that mix and match well with others.

Computer engineering is not really that far from that Lego story of yours from
years ago.
You plan things out in advance, think in terms of reusable components, and fill
in the little details with what is called programming or coding – writing down
what you want the computer to do.

If planning, building and filling in details sounds like fun, you may have a
natural affinity towards computer engineering.
But why should you consider a career in the field in this specific day and age?
What if your parents want you to become a doctor or a lawyer?
Let me offer a few arguments.

I want you to think through how the world still has so much to benefit from
technology.
Facebook and Snapchat are great inventions, yes – they make you happy, sad,
jealous, nostalgic, anxious, excited – so I’ll take that argument.
But we should look more into how technological progress can enhance the future
of humanity across the world.

This May, Facebook started an initiative called `Internet.org`.
This project aims at providing Internet access in underdeveloped areas in the
world.
Its creators believe that so much unprecedented innovation could be unlocked
just by enabling Internet access.
It’s better to see this stuff than hear about it.
Let’s take a look at a couple of the project promotion videos.

(Watch two videos on <https://internet.org>)

Have you heard of Elon Musk?
He’s the CEO of an electronic car company called Tesla, which is threatening the
traditional gasoline car industry with its theme of alternative, more
environmental forms of energy.
It turns out that this man is also the CEO of a space exploration company called
Space X, which is getting closer and closer to the vision of successfully
shooting up commercial space shuttles.

We don’t always have to go to Africa or Mars to experience innovation.
Turn your attention to where you are: Durham.
How many of you have heard of Airbnb?
It is a website where people advertise their houses and apartments so that
tourists or visitors can use the residences for a few days or weeks.
(Show demo of Airbnb)
Look, you can find dozens of places being advertised in the Durham area, at very
affordable prices.
Prior to this service, visitors to Durham probably had to stay at an expensive
hotel or crash uncomfortably on a friend’s couch.
Now, thanks to Airbnb, hosts can make money without having to build hotels, and
guests can enjoy what Durham offers at affordable prices.

I’m bringing these projects up because I want you to look further beyond just
having fun on Facebook and Snapchat.
That’s not all of what technology entails for the future of humanity.
Technology is solving real problems one by one.
So I want you to join in and be a part of this new wave.
Who knows?
You could discover a technology to rescue children from famine.
You could invent a cure to cancer using advanced data analysis methods.

I also want to add that computer engineering is a lucrative and stable
occupation.
According to US News, in 2014 Software Developer was the third best job to have
with an average salary of over $90,000.
I know from experience that companies like Google or Microsoft offer a starting
salary higher than $100,000.
That is an extremely competitive starting salary.
Moreover, the Bureau of Labor Statistics expects an employment growth of 22.8%
in this industry between 2012 and 2022.
That is a huge jump, and implies that in the future the demand for engineers
should exceed the supply.
As long as you can prove you’re a decent engineer, you will not be unemployed.

Before I end the talk, I’d like to leave a special remark for female students.
The industry suffers from a serious lack of female engineers.
In 2012, only 18.9% of undergraduate engineering degrees in the United States
were claimed by female students.
The situation is even worse in the industry.
While I couldn’t find a precise statistic for recent years, in 2003 it was only
11% and I don’t expect it to be much higher now.
But there is no reason this status quo should be the case.
All scientific research concludes women are just as capable as men at
engineering.
We are in need of much more diversity in this industry.

If you found my speech interesting and want to learn coding, look no further
than this website: <https://codecademy.com>.
I have tried a number of coding tutorial websites myself, and none beats
Codecademy.
It is a self-paced, interactive course that is specially catered to students
with little background in engineering.

Thanks everyone.
