# "It's important to fail fast" - but how can we do that well?

In the summer of 2015, I maintained a Wordpress blog titled "The IT Crowd" as
part of a college writing course.
This was the mission statement of my blog:

> Over the summer I will be sharing some stories from my internship at Duke
University's biology department.
You're probably thinking my job involves some sort of biology, but in fact I
know nothing about biology.
Try to guess why I'm there based on what I do: I answer a lot of emails, and
about half of them involve asking to turn the computer off and on.
That's right, I work for the department's IT support team.
We're a small team of 6 people overseeing hundreds of department members and the
computers they use, so sometimes the day could be quite busy.
While asking to reboot over and over again might sound quite boring, in fact the
job is a lot more than that.
Having specialized knowledge across a multitude of topics is one thing, but
explaining it to non-technical folks is another.
The most exciting part about tech support is that, despite the obviously
technical nature, there is always that one human factor by the end of any
support session.
On my blog, I want to explore these psychological intricacies behind customer
support: what makes our customers satisfied, and how we train ourselves to meet
such expectations.

The following was Post #6.

--------

Two weeks ago I wrote a post on a printing disaster, in which I sounded pretty
critical of various bottlenecks in IT.
Since then, my boss has had time to read the post.
While she appreciated my fresh perspective, she wanted to remind me of the fact
that we belong under a larger umbrella called Trinity Technology Services (TTS)
and that there's only so much to what we can do as a small part.
TTS is an overseeing organization above all IT departments across Trinity
College.
She also added that a TTS-wide post mortem meeting had taken place, and that the
College had established a printing policies committee, where she would have an
influence on deciding the timeframe of a printer update.
She concluded by emphasizing that things have come to a good resolution because
everyone across the campus was able to "fail fast" - some problems could only be
foreseen when they appear.

Her comments really got me thinking about what it means to fail fast in an
organization environment.
TTS is a big group, and it is not easy for us, a small part of it, to fail in a
manner that will help identify and resolve a problem as quickly as possible.

I realized I could think of the problem in terms of surface areas.
For an analogy, imagine a bubble gum.
The air inside remains within the growing surface of the bubble.
Then after the surface area grows beyond a certain point, the air can no longer
be contained within and must be released.
This analogy applies well to any task in IT or many other fields.
As I investigate a problem, the size of the issue keeps growing, and if it is
too big for our department to handle, it must be passed on to a higher up.

I've come to believe that the essence of failing fast in an organization
environment lies in setting the right triggers at these surface area limits,
where our responsibilities and theirs meet.
Let's bring back the printing disaster for an example.
That day we failed to specified exactly which printers across our department
were acting up, if they were rejecting certain or all people, and so on.
Had we conveyed these specific details to the printing team earlier, we could
have cut down the time until complete resolution by 2-3 days, I believe.
Instead, we could have installed an automated testing system in advance that
invokes thorough printing tests on all of our printers and generates a report
that we could send to the printing team right away.
This kind of automation costs development labor, but it will be worth the cost
in the long run, because it sits right at the surface areas, ready to escalate
our internal problems to the higher ups.

Failing fast and well is definitely a task I'll have to constantly figure out
throughout the remainder of my career as an engineer.
I'd love to hear from others about how their workplaces perceive failures and
recoveries.
