# "I received a PhD in IT support" - What would that look like?

In the summer of 2015, I maintained a Wordpress blog titled "The IT Crowd" as
part of a college writing course.
This was the mission statement of my blog:

> Over the summer I will be sharing some stories from my internship at Duke
University's biology department.
You're probably thinking my job involves some sort of biology, but in fact I
know nothing about biology.
Try to guess why I'm there based on what I do: I answer a lot of emails, and
about half of them involve asking to turn the computer off and on.
That's right, I work for the department's IT support team.
We're a small team of 6 people overseeing hundreds of department members and the
computers they use, so sometimes the day could be quite busy.
While asking to reboot over and over again might sound quite boring, in fact the
job is a lot more than that.
Having specialized knowledge across a multitude of topics is one thing, but
explaining it to non-technical folks is another.
The most exciting part about tech support is that, despite the obviously
technical nature, there is always that one human factor by the end of any
support session.
On my blog, I want to explore these psychological intricacies behind customer
support: what makes our customers satisfied, and how we train ourselves to meet
such expectations.

The following was Post #5.

--------

Though I know nothing about biology, a big portion of my customers are PhD
candidates, and as such I often get to peek at their work toward doctoral
degrees.
This Tuesday I was asked to provide IT presence at a customer's thesis defense,
and while my lack of biology knowledge kept me from understanding anything, the
experience really got me thinking through the implications of professionalism.

This candidate made a big career change from a gardener to a biology PhD
student, and it has taken her six years to reach her doctoral degree.
During these six years, she strived toward the one goal of studying plant
exuality, and I was surprised to hear the difficult steps she underwent.
In order to determine what factors determine a plant's asexuality, she had to
revise her approaches several times to reach the conclusion.
Moreover, her research involved multiple 3-month periods of camping out in
Montana, followed countless hours of data analysis.

Watching these slides, I thought about what the term professionalism would mean
to my customers.
These incredibly committed people dedicate a big part of their youth to
understanding the nature, and they humbly receive their degree by sharing
hard-earned knowledge.
To these people, professionalism means a cautious analysis of observations an
adding a layer of understanding.

Then I started questioning my own job here from this angle.
Are we closely monitoring the services we perform?
Are we constantly coming up with ways to reach out to our customers more quickly
and more accurately?
I look back, and my team honestly lacks this sort of motivation in our routine.
I see the same mistakes take place over and over again, and we as a team must
come up with a systematic way to control these errors.

A canonical counterexample would be how we handle printer cartridges.
We're supposed to keep a stock of cartridges always ready, but I have noticed
several times there being no replacements available when customers ask.
So we have to then place an order and wait for a week till it arrives.
Just like the biologists, we need to observe ourselves and devise ways to
contain complexity within out own control.
An ideal solution is to have an automated system that monitors cartridge
statuses and places orders if almost out of stocks.

As much as there is help I provide to my customers, there is a lot to learn from
them.
This Tuesday I got to witness an end to the beautiful and sacred process of
earning a doctoral degree, and I imagined what a PhD in IT support would look
like.
While there is no such degree in reality, the same mentality transfers over:
observe, modify, repeat.
That is the way to staying one step ahead of our customers, just as it is the
path to a successful academic degree.
