# Undergraduate education

I always thought my undergraduate education didn't suit me, but never critically
analyzed exactly how so.

At the end of the day, I think the dislike was largely a psychological one.
My experiences in army had converted me to an extremely pragmatic (with a
fragrance of idealism in background, of course) stance, and the notion of modern
college as "a collection of youth who are beginning to learn about life" no
longer clicked with me.

Yet I also noticed concrete evidence that the higher education around me had
systematic issues.
The first and foremost problem was the terrible quality of some engineering
classes.
I mostly took very generic engineering classes, whose same topics are taught at
hundreds of other universities across the world.
These exact same topics have been lectured at least a thousand times across the
world.
Provided this, I would imagine that the quality of their assignments and
evaluations had been mastered by countless faculty, TAs and students alike.
But such was not the case.
In one of my computer science classes, this professor literally copied
assignments from the equivalent course at Stanford.
In doing so, he clearly hadn't even read through the project descriptions, as
they were lacking obvious details, which would only get discovered by students
very late into the project deadline.
The professor always made last-minute spec updates, chaos ensued among students,
not enough time was available for proper grading, students ended up not
understanding the materials...
It was just terrible.

Here's a suggestion around this problem: could universities across the world
just transparently share many of their curricula?
Why can't my CS XXX course at Duke just follow the exact same curriculum,
project assignments and lecture notes as the equivalent CS YYY at Stanford -
when my professor would end up copying materials from Stanford anyway?
If all these institutions shared their materials and developed a common program
for these common courses, the quality of the courses would be through the roof.
Now, a valid concern against this idea is around student plagiarism.
I suggest resolving this concern by also sharing a plagiarism checker.
Student plagiarism during CS projects is already happening (I witnessed it many
times), and the only sound way against it is a serious plagiarism checker.
Many universities are already using plagiarism checkers to great success.
We can develop them further into a state of the art.

The Stanford-copycat incident reminds me of a separate issue with university
faculty.
For a lot of them, teaching is not their primary concern - their primary concern
is research.
Students pay crazy amounts of tuition toward their salaries, only to be treated
as second-class citizens in the classroom.
I understand that, for some advanced, state-of-the-art, research-oriented
courses, people who do the research should do the teaching.
But for a lot of lower-level courses, this need not be the case.
These faculty and grad students are already overloaded with their own work.
I argue that having designated lecturers (faculty who don't have to do research)
could be a good solution.
I witnessed a great case of lecturer-led instruction during my summer school at
UC Berkeley.
I took CS61BL (Data Structures and Algorithms) with Mike Clancy, a lecturer who
had dedicated decades into mastering the art of teaching this course and to
grading student exams and projects carefully.

Another issue I commonly noticed in university courses was that they tried to
cover an extraneously broad scope of topics in just one semester.
One example was CS 250 (Computer Architecture) at Duke.
It tried to cram a whole section on parallel processing into the last week, and
I honestly doubt that more than 15% of the class actually understood how
instruction pipelining works.
Couldn't you just separate that section into another advanced course?
Why does a course have to be so ambitious in terms of breadth?
What truly remains in a student's head over the years is depth, not breadth.
When you try to cram such a wide range of things into a student's head, which is
already filled with exam and assignment stress, I question the sincerity of your
education.

Lastly, for someone like me who knows exactly what field he/she wanted to
research and build a career in, a lot of these classes are honestly a waste of
time - unless he/she maintains a truly genuine passion into learning for
learning's sake.
But not everyone (including me) has a passion like that.
In my case, my specific field of choice in engineering is front-end
architecture.
There is no way any university in the world properly covers this field, because
it is so nascent (or, should I say, it is only beginning to discover decades of
relevant prior research).

As I sum up, I'd like to make this clear: I'm not saying we should get rid of
undergraduate education.
What I really mean to say is this: there are *a lot* of people (myself included)
who eventually find undergrad unfitting but are socially pressured into going to
college because of career/social/familial expectations.
I am certain that society is paying a huge cost by exerting such pressures and
expectations.
It's not just the college loan debts - the lost time (4 years of one's peak
youth) and the corresponding sense of psychological loss are not even
measurable.
Society will be better off by re-evaluating such unfounded expectations, and by
acknowledging that alternative forms of personnel evaluation could be better for
some people.
